# Problem 1

>Develop a lexer using the ANTLR lexical token analyser to detect valid IP specification in an input file. Recall, that IP addresses are expressed as a set of four numbers - an example address might be 192.158.1.38. Each number in the set can range from 0 to 255. So, the full IP addressing range goes from 0.0.0.0 to 255.255.255.255. You may choose to have a very permissive description of tokens that can detect sequences whose numeric values are not in the 0 to 255 range and then in a subsequent pass, determine which are in fact valid IP specifications.

## Steps

### Step 1 - Develop the grammar

First, we need to create a new file to create the grammar for this lexer:

```g4
grammar IPv4;

@header {
    package pt.up.fe.comp2024;
}

SEGMENT : [1-9] | [1-9][0-9] | '1'[0-9][0-9] | '2'[0-4][0-9] | '25'[0-5];

WS : [ \t\n\r\f]+ -> skip ;

program
    : number dot number dot number dot number EOF
    ;

number
    : value=SEGMENT #Literal
    ;

dot
    : value='.' #Point
    ;
```

We know an IP address always has 4 numbers separated by dots (`.`). Therefore, we can define the program that detects a valid IP address as 4 `number` rules, which have a value equal to a `SEGMENT` token separated by dots (`.`), followed by an `EOF` (End Of File).
The `SEGMENT` token represents the regular expression that validates each number in the IP address. It represents 5 different cases:

- `[1-9]`: For cases where the number is a single digit, leftmost 0's don't count
- `[1-9][0-9]`: For cases where the number is made up of 2 digits, leftmost 0's don't count
- `'1'[0-9][0-9]`: For cases where the number is made up of 3 digits and the leftmost digit is a `1`, in which case the other 2 digits can be any digit.
- `'2'[0-4][0-9]`: For cases where the number is made up of 3 digits, the leftmost digit is a `2` and the middle digit ranges from `0` to `4`, in which case the rightmost digit can range from `0` to `9`
- `'25'[0-5]`: For cases where the number is made up of 3 digits, the leftmost digit is a `2` and the middle digit is a `5`, in which case the rightmost digit can only range from `0` to `5` 

### Step 2 - Develop the Visitor

With the grammar out of the way, we now need to develop the visitor, which is going to traverse the `JmmNode` tree and validate the input according to the `IPv4` grammar built previously.

The `IPv4Generator.java` file looks like this:

```java
package pt.up.fe.comp2024;

import pt.up.fe.comp.jmm.ast.AJmmVisitor;
import pt.up.fe.comp.jmm.ast.JmmNode;

public class IPv4Generator extends AJmmVisitor<String, String> {

    protected void buildVisitor() {
        addVisit("Program", this::dealWithProgram);
        addVisit("Number", this::dealWithLiteral);
        addVisit("Point", this::dealWithLiteral);
    }

    private String dealWithProgram(JmmNode jmmNode, String s) {
        s = (s != null ? s : "");
        for (JmmNode child : jmmNode.getChildren()) {
            s += visit(child, s);
            visit(child);
        }
        return s;
    }

    private String dealWithLiteral(JmmNode jmmNode, String s) {
        return jmmNode.get("value");
    }
}
```

This visits the child of the `Program` node, which consists of 4 `Number` nodes separated by `Point` nodes.
The `dealWithLiteral()` method is called when a child node of `Program` is either a `Number` or `Point`, in which case it returns the `value` of that node which is:

- A number ranging from 0 to 255, if it's a `Number` node
- A dot (`.`), if it's a `Point` node

This way, we build a string while traversing through the tree, which we can print it later to the terminal, if the IP is valid.

### Step 3 - Tweak SimpleParser and Launcher

Now we just need to change the `SimpleParser.java` and `Launcher.java` files so they call upon the files we created.

For the `SimpleParser.java` file we need to change the lexer and parser used, so we change lines 42 and 46 to this:

```java
var lex = new IPv4Lexer(input);
var parser = new IPv4Parser(tokens);
```

Although we haven't created the **IPv4Lexer** and **IPv4Parser** classes, ANTLR automatically creates them the next time we build and run the program.

In the `Launcher.java` file we need to change the generator object we create:

```java
IPv4Generator gen = new IPv4Generator();  
gen.visit(parserResult.getRootNode(), "");
```

This creates an `IPv4Generator` object and then starts traversing through it starting at the root node.

With this, a valid IP will be accepted by the parser while an invalid IP will throw an error.
